# 2019 01 30

Every Instruction Set Architecture (ISA) has cross-compatability with
processors which implement that ISA.

## Measuring Performance

### Performance Issues

Latency

: is the pause between instruction and execution

Throughput

: is the rate of instruction completion (work per unity time)

* measured in MIPS (**M**illions of **I**nstructions **P**er **S**econd)

* FLOPS (**F**loating **P**oint **O**perations **P**er **S**econd)

NOTE: Memorize all metric prefixes

Bandwidth

: like throughput, but measured in the context of networks

* bps - bits per second

* Bps - bytes per second (8 bits)

* word - 4 bytes

Response time

: like latency, but for larger amounts of work

* latency is for a single instruction

* response time for the entire program

Bottleneck

: something is said to be the bottleneck when it is the limiting factor in
  execution

### Performance Metrics

#### 1. Clock Rate

In a modern computer, there is a clock, which is basically just a square wave.
Processing only happens on the rising edge of the square wave.

\begin{center}% diagram of square wave
\begin{tikzpicture}
% user attrib: percusse
% https://tex.stackexchange.com/questions/113046/how-to-draw-a-square-wave
\begin{axis}[grid=both,xmin=0,width=7cm,height=4cm,
title=Square Wave,xlabel={Time$\rightarrow$},ylabel=Amplitude]
\addplot+[thick,const plot, no marks,samples at={0,1,...,10}] {(mod(x,2)>0?0:1)};
\end{axis}
\end{tikzpicture}
\end{center}

Peak to peak (or trough to trough) is equivalent to a clock cycle.

* 1Hz = 1 cycle per second
* 2GHz = $2 \cdot 10^{9}$ cycles per second *or* $1/(2 \cdot 10^{9})$ seconds per cycle which is equal to. .5 nanoseconds

This is a bad performance metric because there is a *variable* number of
operations per clock across processors.

Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS)

#### 2. MIPS

Each ISA has different instructions, so MIPS can't be used to compare processors
in different ISAs

#### 3. Benchmarks

e.g. SPECMARKS

These benchmarks are the geometric mean of performance across geometric mean
of "typical" programs


$$ \text{geometric mean} =
  \left(
       \prod_{i=1}^n \frac{\text{time}_i}
                          {\text{(reference time)}_i}
  \right)^{1/n}$$

## Comparing Performance

Unit \% improvement

i.e. if $\dfrac{\text{time}_B}{\text{time}_A} = n$ then $A$ is $n$
times faster than $B$ or $(n-1)\times 100$ percent faster.

## Lessons in Evaluating Performance

* Additive v. multiplicative comparison

* Get the units right using dimensional analysis.

* Weighted Averages

| instruction type                     |  A |  B |  C |
|--------------------------------------|----|----|----|
| cycles per instruct.                 |  2 |  3 |  4 |
| percentage of time per instruct type | 50 | 20 | 30 |

At 36 Hz, ...

For each average, multiply the CPI by the percentage and then sum these
components to find the weighted average CPI. Then convert to MIPS using
dimensional analysis
